TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
VIRGINIA WOOLF
https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.176580/page/n17/mode/2up 

UNIFORM EDITION OF TUI WORKS OF VIRGINIA WOOi;i     
THE VOYAGE OUT 
JACOB’S ROOM 
MRS. DALLOWAY 
THE COMMON READER 
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
In preparation 
NIGHT AND DAY 
ORLANDO
TO THE LIGHTHOUSEVIRGINIA WOOLF    
PUBLISHED BY LEONARD & VIRGINIA WOOLF A'f’ 'niK HOCJARl’H PRESS, 'FAVIS'FOCK SQUARE, LONDON, 1930
First published May 1927 Second impression June 1927 Third impression May 1928 Neuu Edition 1930     
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, EDINBURGH
CONTENTS 
I. The Window II. Time Passes III. The Lighthouse ,     
PAGE 
• 9 • J93 
. 223
vii 
I     
'rffi': wfXDuw
I     
“ Yes, of course, if it’s fine to-morrow,” said Mrs.Ramsay. “ But you’ll have to be up with the lark,” she added. 
To her son these words conveyed an extra- ordinary joy, as if it were settled the expedition were bound to take place, and the wonder to which he had looked forward, for years and years it seemed, was, after a night’s darkness and a day’s sail, within touch. Since he belonged, even at the age of six, to that great clan which cannotkeep this feeling separate from that, but must let future prospects, with their joys and sorrows, cloud what is actually at hand, since to such peopleeven in earliest childhood any turn in the wheelof sensation has the power to crystallise andtransfix the moment upon which its gloom orradiance rests, James Ramsay, sitting on the floor cutting out pictures from the illustrated catalogueof the Army and Navy Stores, endowed thepicture of a refrigerator as his mother spoke with
heavenly bliss. It was fringed with joy. Then
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE     
wheelbarrow, the lawn-mower, the sound of poplartrees, leaves whitening before rain, rooks cawing,brooms knocking, dresses rustling—all these were so coloured and distinguished in his mindthat he had already his private code, his secret language, though he appeared the image of stark and uncompromising severity, with his high fore head and his fierce blue eyes, impeccably candid and pure, frowning slightly at the sight of humanfrailty, so that his mother, watching him guide his scissors neatly round the refrigerator, imaginedhim all red and ermine on the Bench or directing a stern and momentous enterprise in some crisis of public affairs. 
“ But,” said his father, stopping in front of the drawing-room window, “ it won’t be fine.” Had there been an axe handy, a poker, or anyweapon that would have gashed a hole in his father’s breast and killed him, there and then, James would have seized it. Such were the extremes of emotion that Mr. Ramsay excited in his children’s breasts by his mere presence; standing, as now, lean as a knife, narrow as the blade of one, grinning sarcastically, not only with the pleasure of disillusioning his son and casting ridicule upon his wife, who was ten thousand times better in every way than he was (James thought), but also with some secret conceit at his 12
THE WINDOW   
own accuracy of judgement. What he said wastrue. It was always true. He was incapable ofuntruth; never tampered with a fact; neveraltered a disagreeable word to suit the pleasure or convenience of any mortal being, least of all of his own children, who, sprung from his loins, should be aware from childhood that life is diffi- cult; facts uncompromising; and the passage to that fabled land where our brightest hopes are extinguished, our frail barks founder in darkness(here Mr. Ramsay would straighten his back andnarrow his little blue eyes upon the horizon), onethat needs, above all, courage, truth, and the power to endure. 
“ But it may be fine—I expect it will be fine,” said Mrs. Ramsay, making some little twist of the reddish-brown stocking she was knitting, im patiently. If she finished it to-night, if they didgo to the Lighthouse after all, it was to be givento the Lighthouse keeper for his little boy, whowas threatened with a tuberculous hip; togetherwith a pile of old magazines, and some tobacco, indeed whatever she could find lying about, notreally wanted, but only littering the room, to give those poor fellows who must be bored to death sitting all day with nothing to do butpolish the lamp and trim the wick and rakeabout on their scrap of garden, something to 13
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
amuse them. For how would you like to be shutup for a whole month at a time, and possibly morein stormy weather, upon a rock the size of a tennis lawn.^ she would ask; and to have noletters or newspapers, and to see nobody; if youwere married, not to see your wife, not to knowhow your children were,—if they were ill, if theyhad fallen down and broken their legs or arms;to see the same dreary waves breaking week after week, and then a dreadful storm coming, and the windows covered with spray, and birds dashedagainst the lamp, and the whole place rocking, and not be able to put your nose out of doors tor fear of being swept into the sea.? How would youlike that? she asked, addressing herself particularly to her daughters. So she added, rather differently, one must take them whatever comforts one can. 
“ It’s due west,” said the atheist Tanslcy,holding his bony fingers spread so that the wiiui blew through them, for he was sharing Mr.Ramsay’s evening walk up and down, up anddown the terrace. That is to say, the wind blewfrogi the worst possible direction for landing at the Lighthouse. Yes, he did say disagreeablethings, Mrs. Ramsay admitted; it was odious ofhim to rub this in, and make James still moredisappointed; but at the same time, she wouldnot let them laugh at him. “ The atheist ”, they14
THE WINDOW 
called him; “the little atheist”. Rose mockedhim; Prue mocked him; Andrew, Jasper, Rogermocked him; even old Badger without a tooth in his head had bit him, for being (as Nancy putit) the hundred and tenth young man to chasethem all the way up to the Hebrides when it wasever so much nicer to be alone. 
“ Nonsense,” said Mrs. Ramsay, with great severity. Apart from the habit of exaggeration which they had from her, and from the implica tion (which was true) that she asked too manypeople to stay, and had to lodge some in the town,she could not bear incivility to her guests, to young men in particular, who were poor as churchmice, “ exceptionally able ”, her husband said, his great admirers, and come there for a holiday. Indeed, she had the whole of the other sex underher protection; for reasons she could not explain, for their chivalry and valour, for the fact that theynegotiated treaties, ruled India, controlled finance; finally for an attitude towards herself which nowoman could fail to feel or to find agreeable, something trustful, childlike, reverential; whichan old woman could take from a young man with out loss of dignity, and woe betide the girl—prayHeaven it was none of her daughters!—who didnot feel the worth of it, and all that it implied, to the marrow of her bones. 
^5
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
She turned with severity upon Nancy. Hehad not chased them, she said. He had been 
asked. 
They must find a way out of it all. Theremight be some simpler way, some less laborious way, she sighed. When she looked in the glass and saw her hair grey, her cheek sunk, at fitty, she thought, possibly she might have managed
things better—her husband; money; his books. But for her own part she would never for a single second regret her decision, evade difficulties, or slur over duties. She was now formidable to behold, and it was only in silence, looking up 
from their plates, after she had spoken so severely about Charles Tansley, that her daughters Prue, Nancy, Rose—could sport with infidel ideas which they had brewed for themselves of a life different from hers; in Paris, perhaps; a wilder life; not always taking care of some man or other; for there was in all their minds a mute questioning of deference and chivalry, of the Bank of England and the Indian Empire, of ringed fingers and lace, though to them all there was something in this of the essence of beauty, which called out the manliness in their girlish hearts, and made them, as they sat at table beneath their mother’s eyes, honour her strange severity, her extreme courtesy, like a Queen’s raising from the mud a beggar’s i6
THE WINDOW 
dirty foot and washing it, when she thus admonishedthem so very severely about that wretched atheist who had chased them to—or, speaking accurately, been invited to stay with them in—the Isle ofSkye.
“ There’ll be no landing at the Lighthouseto-morrow,” said Charles Tansley, clapping his hands together as he stood at the window withher husband. Surely, he had said enough. Shewished they would both leave her and James alone and go on talking. She looked at him. He wassuch a miserable specimen, the children said, all humps and hollows. He couldn’t play cricket; he poked; he shuffled. He was a sarcastic brute, Andrew said. They knew what he liked best to be for ever walking up and down, up and down,with Mr. Ramsay, and saying who had won this, who had won that, who was a “ first-rate man ” at Latin verses, who was “ brilliant but I thinkfundamentally unsound ”, who was undoubtedlythe “ ablest fellow in Balliol ”, who had buriedhis light temporarily at Bristol or Bedford, butwas bound to be heard of later when his Prolego mena, of which Mr. Tansley had the first pagesin proof with him if Mr. Ramsay would like to see them, to some branch of mathematics orphilosophy saw the light of day. That was whatthey talked about. 
B *7
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
She could not help laughing herself sometimes.She said, the other day, something about “ wavesmountains high Yes, said Charles Tansley,it was a little rough. “ Aren’t you drenched to the skin.? ” she had said. “ Damp, not wetthrough,” said Mr. Tansley, pinching his sleeve, feeling his socks. 
But it was not that they minded, the children said. It was not his face; it was not his manners.It was him—^his point of view. ’V^Tcn theytalked about something interesting, people, music,history, anything, even said it was a fine eveningso why not sit out of doors, then what they com plained of about Charles Tansley was that until he had turned the whole thing round and madeit somehow reflect himself and disparage tlicm, put them all on edge somehow with his acid wayof peeling the flesh and blood off everything, hewas not satisfied. And he would go to picture galleries, they said, and he would ask one, did one like his tie.? God knows, said Rose, onedid not. 
Disappearing as stealthily as stags from the dinner-table directly the meal was over, the eight sons and daughters of Mr. and Mrs. Ramsaysought their bedrooms, their fastnesses in a housewhere there was no other privacy to debate any Aing, everything; Tansley’s tie; the passing of
THE WINDOW 
the Reform Bill; sea-birds and butterflies; people; while the sun poured into those attics, which aplank alone separated from each other so that every footstep could be plainly heard and the Swiss girl sobbing for her father who was dyingof cancer in a valley of the Grisons, and lit up bats, flannels, straw hats, ink-pots, paint-pots, beetles, and the skulls of small birds, while it drew from the long frilled strips of seaweedpinned to the wall a smell of salt and weeds, which was in the towels too, gritty with sandfrom bathing. 
Strife, divisions, difference of opinion, pre judices twisted into the very fibre of being, oh that they should begin so early, Mrs. Ramsay deplored. They were so critical, her children. They talked such nonsense. She went from the dining-room, holding James by the hand, since he would not go with the others. It seemed to her suchnonsense—inventing differences, when people, heaven knows, were different enough without that. The real differences, she thought, standing by the drawing-room window, are enough, quite enough.She had in mind at the moment, rich and poor, high and low; the great in birth receiving fromher, half grudging, some respect, for had shenot in her veins the blood of that very noble, if slightly mythical, Italian house, whose daughters, 19
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
scattered about English drawing-rooms in thenineteenth century, had lisped so charmingly,had stormed so wildly, and all her wit and herbearing and her temper came from them, andnot from the sluggish English, or the coldScotch; but more profoundly she ruminated theother problem, of rich and poor, and the thingsshe saw with her own eyes, weekly, daily, hereor in London, when she visited this widow, orthat struggling wife in person with a bag onher arm, and a note-book and pencil with whichshe wrote down in columns carefully ruled for the purpose wages and spendings, employmentand unemployment, in the hope that thus shewould cease to be a private woman whose charity was half a sop to her own indignation, half a relief to her own curiosity, and become, whatwith her untrained mind she greatly admired, aninvestigator, elucidating the social problem. 
Insoluble questions they were, it seemed to her, standing there, holding James by the hand. Hehad followed her into the drawing-room, that young man they laughed at; he was standing bythe table, fidgeting with something, awkwardly,feeling himself out of things, as she knew withoutlooking round. They had all gone—the children Minta Doyle and Paul Rayley; Augustus Car 
michael ; her husband—^they had all gone. So she20
THE WINDOW 
turned with a sigh and said, “ Would it bore youto come with me, Mr. Tansley.? ” 
She had a dull errand in the town; she had a letter or two to write; she would be ten minutesperhaps; she would put on her hat. And, withher basket and her parasol, there she was again, ten minutes later, giving out a sense of beingready, of being equipped for a jaunt, which, how ever, she must interrupt for a moment, as they passed the tennis lawn, to ask Mr. Carmichael, who was basking with his yellow cat’s eyes ajar, so that like a cat’s they seemed to reflect the branches moving or the clouds passing, but to give no inkling of any inner thoughts or emotionwhatsoever, if he wanted anything. 
For they were making the great expedition, she said, laughing. They were going to the town. “ Stamps, writing-paper, tobacco? ” shesuggested, stopping by his side. But no, hewanted nothing. His hands clasped themselvesover his capacious paunch, his eyes blinked, as if he would have liked to reply kindly to these blandishments (she was seductive but a little nervous) but could not, sunk as he was in a grey green somnolence which embraced them all, without need of words, in a vast and benevolentlethargy of well-wishing; all the house; all theworld ; all the people in it, for he had slipped into 21
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
his glass at lunch a few drops of something, whichaccounted, the children thought, for the vivid streak of canary-yellow in moustache and beardthat were otherwise milk-white, fie wantednothing, he murmured. 
He should have been a great philosopher, said Mrs. Ramsay, as they went down the road to thefishing village, but he had made an unfortunatemarriage. Holding her black parasol veiy erect, and moving with an indescribable air of expecta tion, as if she were going to meet someone rnuinl the corner, she told the story; an affair at Oxfordwith some girl; an early marriage; poverty;going to India; translating a little poetry “ verybeautifully, I believe ”, being willing to teach theboys Persian or Hindustanee, but what really wasthe use of thati*—and then lying, as they saw him,on the lawn. 
It flattered him; snubbed as he had been,it soothed him that Mrs. Ramsay should tell him this. Charles Tansley revived. Insinuat ing, too, as she did the greatness of man’s in tellect, even in its decay, the subjection of all wives—not that she blamed the girl, and the marriage had been happy enough, she believed—to their husband’s labours, she made him feel better pleased with himself than he had done yet, and he would have liked, had they taken a cab,
THE WINDOW 
for example, to have paid the fare. As for her little bag, might he not carry that? No, no, she 
said, she always carried that herself. She did too. Yes, he felt that in her. He felt many things, something in particular that excited him anddisturbed him for reasons which he could not give. He would like her to see him, gowned and hooded,walking in a procession. A fellowship, a pro 
fessorship,—he felt capable of anything and sawhimself—but what was she looking at? At a manpasting a bill. The vast flapping sheet flattened itself out, and each shove of the brush revealed fresh legs, hoops, horses, glistening reds and blues, beautifully smooth, until half the wall was coveredwith the advertisement of a circus; a hundredhorsemen, twenty performing seals, lions, tigers. . . Craning forwards, for she was short-sighted, sheread out how it ... “ will visit this town.” It was terribly dangerous work for a one-armed man,she exclaimed, to stand on top of a ladder like that—^his left arm had been cut off in a reapingmachine two years ago. 
“ Let us all go! ” she cried, moving on, as if all those riders and horses had filled her with child like exultation and made her forget her pity. 
“ Let’s go,” he said, repeating her words,clicking them out, however, with a self-conscious- ness that made her wince. “ Let us go to the23
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
Circus.” No. He could not say it right. Hecould not feel it right. But why not.? she wondered.What was wrong with him then.? She liked him warmly, at the moment. Had they not beentaken, she asked, to circuses when they werechildren.? Never, he answered, as if she asked thevery thing he wanted to reply to; had been longingall these days to say, how they did not go to cir- cuses. It was a large family, nine brothers andsisters, and his father was a working man; “ Myfather is a chemist, Mrs. Ramsay. He keeps a shop.” He himself had paid his own way since hewas thirteen. Often he went without a greatcoat in winter. He could never “return hospitality ”(those were his parched stiff words) at college. He had to make things last twice the time other people did; he smoked the cheapest tobacco; shag;the same the old men smoked on the quays. He
worked hard—seven hours a day; his subject wasnow the influence of something upon somebody they were walking on and Mrs. Ramsay did not quite catch the meaning, only the words, here andthere . . . dissertation . . . fellowship . . . reader ship . . . lectureship. She could not follow the ugly academic jargon, that rattled itself oft' so glibly, but said to herself that she saw now whygoing to the circus had knocked him off his perch, poor little man, and why he came out, instantly 24 •"’
THE WINDOW 
with all that about his father and mother andbrothers and sisters, and she would see to it that they didn’t laugh at him any more; she would tell Priic about it. W'hat he would have liked, shesupposed, would have been to say how he had beento Ibsen with the Ramsays. He was an awful
prig—oh yes, an insufferable bore. For, thoughthey had reached the town now and were in the main street, with carts grinding past on the cobbles, still he went on talking, about settlements, and teaching, and working men, and helping ourown class, and lectures, till she gathered that hehad got back entire self-confidence, had recoveredfrom the circus, and was about (and now again she liked him warmly) to tell her—but here, the houses falling away on both sides, they cameout on the quay, and the whole bay spread before them and Mrs. Ramsay could not help exclaiming, “ Oh, how beautiful! ” For the great plateful of blue water was before her; the hoaryLighthouse, distant, austere, in the midst; and onthe right, as far as the eye could see, fading andfalling, in soft low pleats, the green sand duneswith the wild flowing grasses on them, whichalways seemed to be running away into somemoon country, uninhabited of men. 
That was the view, she said, stopping, growinggreyer-eyed, that her husband loved. 25
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
She paused a moment. But now, she said, artists had come here. There indeed, only a few paces off, stood one of them, in Panama hat and yellow boots, seriously, softly, absorbedly, for all that he was watched by ten little boys, with an air of profound contentment on his round red face, gazing, and then, when he had gazed, dipping; imbuing the tip of his brush in some soft mound of green or pink. Since Mr. Paunceforte had been there, three years before, all the pictures were like that she said, green and grey, with lemon-coloured sailing-boats, and pink women on the beach. 
But her grandmother’s friends, she said, glancing discreetly as they passed, took the greatest pains; first they mixed their own colours, and then they ground them, and then they put damp cloths on them to keep them moist. 
So Mr, Tansley supposed she meant him to see that that man’s picture was skimpy, was that what one said.? The colours weren’t solid.? Was that what one said.? Under the influence of that ex traordinary emotion which had been growing all the walk, had begun in the garden when he had wanted to take her bag, had increased in the town when he had wanted to tell her everything about himself, he was coming to see himself and every thing he had ever known gone crooked a little. It was awfully strange. 
26
THE WINDOW 
There he stood in the parlour of the poky little house where she had taken him, waiting for iicr, while she went upstairs a moment to sec a woman.He heard her quick step above; heard her voice cheerful, then low; looked at the mats, tca-caddics, glass shades; waited quite impatiently; lookedforward eagerly to the walk home, determined to carry her bag; then heard her come out; shut a door; say they must keep the windows openand the doors shut, ask at the house for anythingthey wanted (she must be talking to a child), when, suddenly, in she came, stood for a momentsilent (as if she had been pretending up there, and for a moment let herself be now), stood quite motionless for a moment against a picture of Queen Victoria wearing the blue ribbon of the (I’arter; and all at once he realised that it wasthis: it was this:—she was the most beautiful person he had ever seen. 
With stars in her eyes and veils in her hair, with cyclamen and wild violets—what nonsense was he thinking.? She was fifty at least; she had eight chikiren. Stei)ping through fields of flowers and taking to her breast buds that had broken and lambs that had fallen; with the stars in her eyes 
and the wind in her hair—He took her bag. “ Clood-byc, Elsie,” she said, and they walked up the street, she holding her parasol erect and ay
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
walking as if she expected to meet someone roundthe corner, while for the first time in his life Charles Tansley felt an extraordinary pride; a mandigging in a drain stopped digging and looked at her; let his arm fall down and looked at her; Charles Tansley felt an extraordinary pride; felt the wind and the cyclamen and the violets for hewas walking with a beautiful woman for the first time in his life. He had hold of her bag. 
a 
“ No going to the Lighthouse, James," hesaid, as he stood by the window, speaking awk wardly, but trying in deference to Mrs. Ramsayto soften his voice into some semblance ofgeniality at least. 
Odious little man, thought Mrs. Ramsay, whygo on saying that.? 
3 
Perhaps you will wake up and find the sun shining and the birds singing," she said com passionately, smoothing the little boy’s hair, for her husband, with his caustic saying that it wouldnot be fine, had dashed his spirits she could see. This going to the Lighthouse was a passion of his, she saw, and then, as if her husband had not 2.8
THE WINDOW 
said enough, with his caustic saying that it wouldnot be fine to-morrow, this odious little man wentand rubbed it in all over again. 
“ Perhaps it will be fine to-morrow,” she said, smoothing his hair. 
All she could do now was to admire the re frigerator, and turn the pages of the Stores list in the hope that she might come upon somethinglike a rake, or a mowing-machine, which, withits prongs and its handles, would need the greatest skill and care in cutting out. All these young menparodied her husband, she reflected; he said it would rain ; they said it would be a positive tornado. 
But here, as she turned the page, suddenly hersearch for the picture of a rake or a mowing machine was interrupted. The gruff murmur,irregularly broken by the taking out of pipesand the putting in of pipes which had kept onassuring her, though she could not hear whatwas said (as she sat in the window), that themen were happily talking; this sound, whichhad lasted now half an hour and had taken its place soothingly in the scale of sounds pressingon top of her, such as the tap of balls uponbats, the sharp, sudden bark now and then, “ How’s that.? How’s that.? ” of the childrenplaying cricket, had ceased; so that the monoton ous fall of the waves on the beach, which for the29
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
most part beat a measured and soothing tattoo to her thoughts and seemed consolingly to repeat overand over again as she sat with the children the words of some old cradle song, murmured by
nature, “ I am guarding you—I am your sup port ”, but at other times suddenly and unex pectedly, especially when her mind raised itself slightly from the task actually in hand, had nosuch kindly meaning, but like a ghostly roll ofdrums remorselessly beat the measure of life, madeone think of the destruction of the island and its engulfment in the sea, and warned her whose dayhad slipped past in one quick doing after anotherthat it was all ephemeral as a rainbow—this soundwhich had been obscured and concealed under the other sounds suddenly thundered hollow in her ears and made her look up with an impulse of terror. 
They had ceased to talk; that was the explana tion. Falling in one second from the tension which had gripped her to the other extreme which, as if to recoup her for her unnecessary expense ofemotion, was cool, amused, and even faintly malicious, she concluded that poor Charles Tansley had been shed. That was of little account to her. If her husband required sacrifices (and indeed he did) she cheerfully offered up to himCharles Tansley, who had snubbed her little boy. 
One moment more, with her head raised- she 30
THE WINDOW 
listened, as if she waited for some habitual sound,some regular mechanical sound; and then, hearingsomething rhythmical, half said, half chanted,beginning in the garden, as her husband beat up
and down the terrace, something between a croakand a song, she was soothed once more, assuredagain that all was well, and looking down at the book on her knee found the picture of a pocketknife with six blades which could only be cut out if James was very careful. 
Suddenly a loud cry, as of a sleep-walker, half roused, something about 
Stormed at with shot and shell 
sung out with the utmost intensity in her ear, made her turn apprehensively to see if any oneheard him. Only Lily Briscoe, she was glad to find; and that did not matter. But the sight of the girl standing on the edge of the lawn painting reminded her; she was supposed to be keeping her head as much in the same position as possible for Lily’s picture. Lily’s picture! Mrs. Ramsay smiled. With her little Chinese eyes and her puckered-up face she would never marry; one could not take her painting very seriously; but she was an independent little creature, Mrs. Ramsay liked her for it, and so remembering her promise, she bent her head. 31
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
4 
Indeed, he almost knocked her easel over, coming down upon her with his hands waving, shouting out “ Boldly we rode and well ”, but, mercifully, he turned sharp, and rode off, to die gloriously she supposed upon the heights of Balaclava. Never was anybody at once so ridicu lous and so alarming. But so long as he kept like that, waving, shouting, she was safe; he would not stand still and look at her picture. And that was what Lily Briscoe could not have endured. Even while she looked at the mass, at the line, at 
the colour, at Mrs. Ramsay sitting in the windowwith James, she kept a feeler on her surroundings lest someone should creep up, and suddenly she should find her picture looked at. But now, with all*her senses quickened as they were, looking, straining, till the colour of the wall and the jacmanna beyond burnt into her eyes, she wasaware of someone coming out of the house, 
coming towards her; but somehow divined, fromthe footfall, William Bankes, so that though her brush quivered, she did not, as she would havedone had it been Mr. Tansley, Paul Rayley,Minta Doyle, or practically anybody else, turn her canvas upon, the grass, but let it stand. William Bankes steod beside her. 
3^ \
THE WINDOW 
They had rooms in the village, and so, walkingin, walking out, parting late on door-mats, hadsaid little things about the soup, about the children, about one thing and another which madethem allies; so that when he stood beside hernow in his judicial way (he was old enough to beher father too, a botanist, a widower, smelling ofsoap, very scrupulous and clean) she just stoodthere. He just stood there. Her shoes wereexcellent, he observed. They allowed the toes their natural expansion. Lodging in the samehouse with her, he had noticed too, how orderly she was, up before breakfast and off to paint, hebelieved, alone: poor, presumably, and without the complexion or the allurement of Miss Doylecertainly, but with a good sense which made herin his eyes superior to that young lady. Now,for instance, when Ramsay bore down on them', shouting, gesticulating. Miss Briscoe, he felt certain, understood. 
Someone had blundered. 
Mr. Ramsay glared at them. He glared at them without seeming to see them. That did make them both vaguely uncomfortable. To gether they had seen a thing they had not beenmeant to see. They had encroached upon a privacy. So, Lily thought, it was probably anexcuse of his for moving, for getting out of c 33
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
earshot, that made Mr. Bankes almost immedi ately say something about its being chilly and suggest taking a stroll. She would come, yes. But it was with difficulty that she took her eyes 
off her picture. 
The jacmanna was bright violet; the wall staring white. She would not have considered it honest to tamper with the bright violet and the staring white, since she saw them like that, fashionable though it was, since Mr. Paunce forte’s visit, to see everything pale, elegant, semi transparent. Then beneath the colour there was the shape. She could see it all so clearly, so 
commandingly, when she looked: it was when she took her brush in hand that the whole thing changed. It was in that moment’s flight between the picture and her canvas that the demons set on her who often brought her to the verge of tears and made this passage from conception to work as dreadful as any down a dark passage for a child. 
Such she often felt herself—struggling against terrific odds to maintain her courage; to say: “ But this is what I see; this is what I sec ”, and so to clasp some miserable remnant of her vision to her breast, which a thousand forces did their best to pluck from her. And it was then too, in that chill and windy way, as she began to paint, that there forced themselves upon her other 
34
THE WINDOW 
things, her own inadequacy, her insignificance, keeping house for her father off the BromptonRoad, and had much ado to control her impulseto fling herself (thank Heaven she had alwaysresisted so far) at Mrs. Ramsay’s knee and sayto her—but what could one say to her ? “ I’min love with you ? ” No, that was not true. “ I’m in love with this all ”, waving her handat the hedge, at the house, at the children ? It was absurd, it was impossible. One couldnot say what one meant. So now she laid herbrushes neatly in the box, side by side, and said to William Bankes: 
“ It suddenly gets cold. The sun seems to give less heat,” she said, looking about her, for it was bright enough, the grass still a soft deepgreen, the house starred in its greenery withpurple passion flowers, and rooks dropping cool cries from the high blue. But something moved,flashed, turned a silver wing in the air. It wasSeptember after all, the middle of September, andpast six in the evening. So off they strolled downthe garden in the usual direction, past the tennis lawn, past the pampas grass, to that break in thethick hedge, guarded by red-hot pokers like brasiers of clear burning coal, between whichthe blue waters of the bay looked bluer thanever. 
35
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
They came there regularly every < drawn by some need. It was as if tht floated off and set sailing thoughts whigrown stagnant on dry land, and gave t bodies even some sort of physical relief, the pulse of colour flooded the bay wit] and the heart expanded with it and th( swam, only the next instant to be checkchilled by the prickly blackness on the waves. Then, up behind the great blacl almost every evening spurted irregularly, one had to watch for it and it was a delighit came, a fountain of white water; anc while one waited for that, one watched, pale semicircular beach, wave after wave shagain and again smoothly a film of motpearl. 
They both smiled, standing there. Th<felt a common hilarity, excited by the i waves; and then by the swift cutting ra< sailing boat, which, having sliced a curvebay, stopped; shivered; let its sail drop dovthen, with a natural instinct to compkpicture, after this swift movement, both c looked at the dunes far away, and inst merriment felt come over them some sad because the thing was completed parti partly because distant views seem to 36
THE WINDOW 
by a million years (Lily thought) the gazer and to be communing already with a sky which beholdsan earth entirely at rest. 
Looking at the far sand hills, William Bankesthought of Ramsay: thought of a road in West morland, thought of Ramsay striding along a road by himself hung round with that solitude which seemed to be his natural air. But this wassuddenly interrupted, William Bankes remem bered (and this must refer to some actual incident), by a hen, straddling her wings out in protection of a covey of little chicks, upon which Ramsay,stopping, pointed his stick and said “ Pretty—pretty,” an odd illumination into his heart, Bankes had thought it, which showed his sim plicity, his sympathy with humble things; but it seemed to him as if their friendship had ceased, there, on that stretch of road. After that, Ramsayhad married. After that, what with one thing andanother, the pulp had gone out of their friendship. Whose fault it was he could not say, only, after a time, repetition had taken the place of newness.It was to repeat that they met. But in this dumbcolloquy with the sand dunes he maintained that his affection for Ramsay had in no way dim inished; but there, like the body of a youngman laid up in peat for a century, with the red fresh on his lips, was his friendship, in its 37
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
acuteness and reality laid up across the bay among the sandhills. 
He was anxious for the sake of this friendship and perhaps too in order to clear himself in his own mind from the imputation of having dried and shrunk—for Ramsay lived in a welter of children, whereas Bankes was childless and a widower—^he was anxious that Lily Briscoe should not disparage Ramsay (a great man in his own way) yet should understand how things stood between them. Begun long years ago, their friendship had petered out on a Westmorland road, where the hen spread her wings before her chicks; after which Ramsay had married, and their paths lying different ways, there had been, certainly for no one’s fault, some tendency, when they met, to repeat. 
Yes. That was it. He finished. He turned from the view. And, turning to walk back the other way, up the drive, Mr. Bankes was alive to things which would not have struck him had not those sandhills revealed to him the body of his friendship lying with the red on its lips laid up in peat—for instance, Cam, the little girl, Ramsay's youngest daughter. She was picking Sweet Alice on the bank. She was wild and fierce. She would not “ give a flower to the gentleman ” as the nursemaid told her. Nol noi no I she would not I 38
THE WINDOW 
She clenched her fist. She stamped. And Mr.Bankes felt aged and saddened and somehow putinto the wrong by her about his friendship. Hemust have dried and shrunk. 
The Ramsays were not rich, and it was a wonder how they managed to contrive it all. Eight children ! To feed eight children onphilosophy! Here was another of them, Jasperthis time, strolling past, to have a shot at a bird, he said, nonchalantly, swinging Lily’s hand like a pump-handle as he passed, which caused Mr.Bankes to say, bitterly, how she was a favourite. There was education now to be considered (true, Mrs. Ramsay had something of her own perhaps)let alone the daily wear and tear of shoes andstockings which those “ great fellows ”, all well grown, angular, ruthless youngsters, must require. As for being sure which was which, or in whatorder they came, that was beyond him. He called them privately after the Kings and Queens ofEngland; Cam the Wicked, James the Ruthless, 
Andrew the Just, Prue the Fair—for Prue wouldhave beauty, he thought, how could she help iti* and Andrew brains. While he walked up thedrive and Lily Briscoe said yes and no and cappedhis comments (for she was in love with them all, in love with this world) he weighed Ramsay’s case, commiserated him, envied him, as if he had seen39
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
him divest himself of all those glories of isolation and austerity which crowned him in youth to cumber himself definitely with fluttering wingsand clucking domesticities. 'I'hcy gave him some 
thing—^William Bankes acknowledged that; it would have been pleasant if Cam had stuck a flower in his coat or clamberetl over his shoulder, as over her father’s, to look at a picture of Vesuvius in eruption; but they hail also, his old friends could not but feel, destroyed something.What would a stranger think now? \\*hat did this Lily Briscoe think? Could one help noticing that habits grew on him? eccentricities, weaknessesperhaps? It was astonishing that a man of his 
intellect could stoop so low as he did—hut that was too harsh a phrase—could de.pcmi so nruch
as he did upon people’s praise. 
“ Oh but,” said Lily, “ think of his work ! ” Whenever she “thought of his wtmk ” she always saw clearly before her a large kitchci^ table. It was Andrew’s doing. She asked himwhat his father’s books were about. “ Subject andobject and the nature of reality ”, Andrew had said. And when she said Heavens, she had no notion what that meant. “Think of a kitchen table then”,he told her, “ when you’re not there”. 
So she always saw, when she thought <jf Mr.Ramsay’s work, a scrubbed kitchen table, it 40
THE WINDOW 
lodged now in the fork of a pear tree, for theyhad reached the orchard. And with a painful effort of concentration, she focused her mind,not upon the silver-bossed bark of the tree, or upon its fish-shaped leaves, but upon a phantomkitchen table, one of those scrubbed board tables, grained and knotted, whose virtue seems to have been laid bare by years of muscular integrity, which stuck there, its four legs in air. Naturally, if one’s days were passed in this seeing of angularessences, this reducing of lovely evenings, withall their flamingo clouds and blue and silver to a 
^hite deal four-legged table (and it was a markfinest minds so to do), naturally one couldnot be judged like an ordinary person. Mr. Bankes liked her for bidding him “ think of his work He had thought of it, often andoften. Times without number, he had said, “ Ramsay is one of those men who do their best work before they are forty ”. He had madea definite contribution to philosophy in one little book when he was only five and twenty; whatcame after was more or less amplification, repeti tion. But the number of men who make a definite contribution to anything whatsoever is very small, he said, pausing by the pear tree, well brushed, scrupulously exact, exquisitely judicial. Suddenly, as if the movement of his hand had41
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
released it, the load of her accumulated impres sions of him _tihfi.d up, and down poured in a ponderous avalanche all she felt about him. Thatwas one sensation. Then up rose in a fume the essence of his being. That was another. Shefelt herself transfixed by the intensity of her per ception; it was his severity; his goodness. I respect you (she addressed him silently) in every atom; you are not vain; you are entirely im personal; you are finer than Mr. Ramsay; youare the finest human being that I know; you haveneither wife nor child (without any sexual feeling, she longed to cherish that loneliness), you live 
for science (involuntarily, sections of potatoes rose before her eyes); praise would be an insult to you; generous, pure-hearted, heroic man!But simultaneously, she remembered how he hadbrought a valet all the way up here; objected to dogs on chairs; would prose for hours (until Mr. Ramsay slammed out of the room) aboutsalt in vegetables and the iniquity of Englishcooks. 
How then did it work out, all this? Howdid one judge people, think of them? Howdidone add up this and that and conclude that it was liking one felt, or disliking? And to those words, what meaning attached, after all? Stand ing now, apparently transfixed, by the pear tree, 42
THE WINDOW 
impressions poured in upon her of those twomen, and to follow her thought was like following a voice which speaks too quickly to be taken downby one’s pencil, and the voice was her own voice saying without prompting undeniable, everlasting, contradictory things, so that even the fissures and humps on the bark of the pear tree wereirrevocably fixed there for eternity. You have greatness, she continued, but Mr. Ramsay has none of it. He is petty, selfish, vain, egotistical he is spoilt; he is a tyrant; he wears Mrs.Ramsay to death; but he has what you (she addressed Mr. Bankes) have not; a fiery unworld liness; he knows nothing about trifles; he loves dogs and his children. He has eight. Youhave none. Did he not come down in two coats the other night and let Mrs. Ramsay trim his hair into a pudding basin.'* All of this dancedup and down, like a company of gnats, eachseparate, but all marvellously controlled in an
invisible elastic net—danced up and down in Lily’s mind, in and about the branches of the pear tree, where still hung in effigy the scrubbedkitchen table, symbol of her profound respect for Mr. Ramsay’s mind, until her thought which hadspun quicker and quicker exploded of its ownintensity; she felt released; a shot went off close at hand, and there came, flying from its 43
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
fragments, frightened, effusive, tumultuous, a flock of starlings.- 
“Jasper!” said Mr. Bankes. They turned the way the starlings flew, over the terrace. Following the scatter of swift-flying birds in the sky they stepped through the gap in the high hedge straight into Mr. Ramsay, who boomed tragically at them, “ Someone had blundered! ” 
His eyes, glazed with emotion, defiant with tragic intensity, met theirs for a second, and trembled on the verge of recognition; but then, raising his hand half-way to his face as if to avert, to brush off, in an agony of peevish shame, their normal gaze, as if he begged them to withhold for a moment what he knew to be inevitable, as if he impressed upon them his own child-like resent- ment of interruption, yet even in the moment of discovery was not to be routed utterly, but was determined to hold fast to something of this delicious emotion, this impure rhapsody of which he was ashamed, but in which he revelled—^he turned abruptly, slammed his private door on 
them; and, Lily Briscoe and Mr. Bankes, looking uneasily up into the sky, observed that the flock of starlings which Jasper had routed with his gun had settled on the tops of the elm trees. 
44
THE WINDOW 
5 
“ And even if it isn’t fine to-morrow,” said Mrs. Ramsay, raising her eyes to glance at William Bankes and Lily Briscoe as they passed, “ it will be another day. And now,” she said, 
thinking that Lily’s charm was her Chinese eyes, aslant in her white, puckered little face, but it would take a clever man to see it, “ and now stand up, and let me measure your leg,” for they mightgo to the Lighthouse after all, and she must see if the stocking did not need to be an inch or twolonger in the leg. 
Smiling, for an admirable idea had flashed upon her this very second—William and Lily should marry—she took the heather mixturestocking, with its criss-cross of steel needles at the mouth of it, and measured it against 
James’s leg. 
“ My dear, stand still,” she said, for in his jealousy, not liking to serve as measuring-blockfor the Lighthouse keeper’s little boy, Jamesfidgeted purposely; and if he did that, how couldshe see, was it too long, was it too short .? sheasked. 
She looked up—what demon possessed him,her youngest, her cherished.-*—^and saw the room,- 4S
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
saw the chair.Sj thought them fearfully shabby. Their entrails, as Andrew said the other day, were all over the floor; but then what was the point, she asked herself, of buying good chairs to let them spoil up here all through the winter when the house, with only one old woman to see to it, positively dripped with wet.'* Never mind: the rent was precisely twopence halfpenny; the children loved it; it did her husband good to be three thousand, or if she must be accurate, three hundred miles from his library and his lectures and his disciples; and there was room for visitors. Mats, camp beds, crazy ghosts of chairs and tables whose London life of service 
was done—^they did well enough here; and a photograph or two, and books. Books, she thought, grew of themselves. She never had 
time to read them. Alas ! even the books that had been given her, and inscribed by the hand of the poet himself: “ For her whose wishes must be obeyed ” . . . “ The happier Helen of our days ” . . . disgraceful to say, she had 
; 
never read them. And Groom on the Mind'
and Bates on the Savage Customs of Polynesia' (“ My dear, stand still,” she said)—neither of those could one send to the Lighthouse. At a certain moment, she supposed, the house would become so shabby that something must be 46
THE WINDOW 
done. If they could be taught to wipe their feet and not bring the beach in with them—that would be something. Crabs, she had to allow, if 
Andrew really wished to dissect them, or if Jasperbelieved that one could make soup from seaweed,one could not prevent it; or Rose’s objects shells, reeds, stones; for they were gifted, herchildren, but all in quite different ways. Andthe result of it was, she sighed, taking in the whole room from floor to ceiling, as she heldthe stocking against James’s leg, that things got shabbier and got shabbier summer after summer. The mat was fading ; the wall-paper wasflapping. You couldn’t tell any more that those were roses on it. Still, if every door in a house is left perpetually open, and no lockmaker in the whole of Scotland can mend a bolt, things mustspoil. What was the use of flinging a greenCashmere shawl over the edge of a picture frame.'’ In two weeks it would be the colour of pea soup.But it was the doors that annoyed her; every doorwas left open. She listened. The drawing-roomdoor was open; the hall door was open; it sounded as if the bedroom doors were open; andcertainly the window on the landing was open, for that she had opened herself. That windows
should be open, and doors shut—simple as it was, could none of them remember it? She would go47
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
into the maids’ bedrooms at night and find the sealed like ovens, except for Marie’s, the Swi girl, who would rather go without a bath th: without fresh air, but then at home, she had sai “the mountains are so beautiful.” She had sa that last night looking out of the window wil tears in her eyes. “ The mountains are s beautiful.” Her father was dying there, MrRamsay knew. He was leaving them fatherles. Scolding and demonstrating (how to make a bee how to open a window, with hands that shut an spread like a Frenchwoman’s) all had fold© 
itself quietly about her, when the girl spoke, as after a flight through the sunshine the wings of bird fold themselves quietly and the blue of it plumage changes from bright steel to soft purple She had stood there silent for there was nothinj to be said. He had cancer of the throat. At th 
recollection—^how she had stood there, how thi girl had said “ At home the mountains are s( beautiful”, and there was no hope, no hope whatever, she had a spasm of irritation, and speaking sharply, said to James 
“ Stand still. Don’t be tiresome,” so that h( knew instantly that her severity was real, ancstraightened his leg and she measured it. 
The stocking was too short by half an inch at least, making allowance for the fact that Sorley’s 48
THE WINDOW 
little boy would be less well grown than
James. 
“ It’s too short,” she said, “ ever so muchtoo short.” 
Never did anybody look so sad. Bitter andblack, half-way down, in the darkness, in the shaft which ran from the sunlight to the depths, perhapsa tear formed; a tear fell; the waters swayed this way and that, received it, and were at rest. Neverdid anybody look so sad. 
But was it nothing but looks people said. What was there behind it—her beauty, hersplendour.? Had he blown his brains out, theyasked, had he died the week before they weremarried—some other, earlier lover, of whomrumours reached one.? Or was there nothing.? nothing but an incomparable beauty which shelived behind, and could do nothing to disturb.? For easily though she might have said at somemoment of intimacy when stories of great passion, of love foiled, of ambition thwarted came herway how she too had known or felt or beenthrough it herself, she never spoke. She was
silent always. She knew then—she knew withouthaving learnt. Her simplicity fathomed whatclever people falsified. Her singleness of mind
made her drop plumb like a stone, alight exact as a bird, gave her, naturally, this swoop and fall ofD 49
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
the spirit upon truth which delighted, eased, sustained—falsely perhaps. 
(“ Nature has but little clay ”, said Mr. Bankes once, hearing her voice on the telephone, and much moved by it though she was only telling him a fact about a train, “ like that of which she moulded you.” He saw her at the end of the line, Greek, blue-eyed, straight-nosed. How incon gruous it seemed to be telephoning to a woman like that. The Graces assembling seemed to have joined hands in meadows of asphodel to compose that fece. Yes, he would catch the 10.30 at Euston. 
“ But she’s no more aware of her beauty than a child,” said Mr. Bankes, replacing the receiver and crossing the room to see what progress the workmen were making with an hotel which they 
were building at the back of his house. And he thought of Mrs. Ramsay as he looked at that stir among the unfinished walls. For always, he thought, there was something incongruous to be worked into the harmony of her face. She clapped a deer-stalker’s hat on her head; she ran across the lawn in goloshes to snatch a child from mischief. So that if it was her beauty merely that one thought of, one must remember the quivering thing, the living thing (they were carrying bricks up a little plank as he watched 50
THE WINDOW 
them), and work it into the picture; or if onethought of her simply as a woman, one mustendow her with some freak of idiosyncrasy; or suppose some latent desire to doff her royalty ofform as if her beauty bored her and all that men
say of beauty, and she wanted only to be like otherpeople, insignificant. He did not know. Hedidnot know. He must go to his work.) 
Knitting her reddish-brown hairy stocking, with her head outlined absurdly by the gilt frame, the green shawl which she had tossed over theedge of the frame, and the authenticated master piece by Michael Angelo, Mrs. Ramsay smoothedout what had been harsh in her manner a momentbefore, raised his head, and kissed her little boyon the forehead. “ Let’s find another picture to cut out,” she said. 
6 
But what had happened.? 
Someone had blundered. 
Starting from her musing she gave meaningto words which she had held meaningless in hermind for a long stretch of time. “ Someone had
blundered ”—Fixing her short-sighted eyes uponher husband, who was now bearing down uponher, she gazed steadily until his closeness revealed to her (the jingle mated itself in her head) that 
i'l
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
something had happened, someone had blundered. But she could not for the life of her think what. 
He shivered; he quivered. All his vanity, all his satisfaction in his own splendour, riding fell as a thunderbolt, fierce as a hawk at the head of his men through the valley ofdeath, had been shattered, destroyed. Stormed at by shot and shell, boldly we rode and well, flashed through the valley of death, volleyed and thundered—straight into Lily Briscoe and William Bankes. He quivered; he shivered. 
Not for the world would she have spoken to him, realising, from the familiar signs, his eyes averted, and some curious gathering together of his person, as if he wrapped himself about and needed privacy into which to regain his equilib rium, that he was outraged and anguished. She stroked James’s head ; she transferred to him what she felt for her husband, and, as she watched him 
chalk yellow the white dress shirt of a gentleman in the Army and Navy Stores catalogue, thought what a. delight it would be to her should he turn 
out a great artist; and why should he not.? Hehad a splcejadid forehead. Then, looking up, as her husbaii^f 
' passed hekr once more, she was 
relieved to find that the ruin was veiled; domes ticity triumphed; customj crooned its soothing Cl '
THE WINDOW 
rhythm, so that when stopping deliberately, as his turn came round again, at the window he bentquizzically and whimsically to tickle James’s barecalf with a sprig of something, she twitted him for having dispatched “that poor young man”,Charles Tansley. Tansley had had to go in andwrite his dissertation, he said. 
“ James will have to write his dissertation oneof these days,” he added ironically, flicking- his sprig. 
Hating his father, James brushed away thetickling spray with which in a manner peculiar to him, compound of severity and humour, he teased his youngest son’s bare leg. 
She was trying to get these tiresome stockingsfinished to send to Sorley’s little boy to-morrow,said Mrs. Ramsay. 
There wasn’t the slightest possible chancethat they could go to the Lighthouse to-morrow,Mr. Ramsay snapped out irascibly. 
How did he know.'* she asked. The wind often changed. 
The extraordinary irrationality of her remark,the folly of women’s minds enraged him. Hehad ridden through the valley of death, beenshattered and shivered; and now she flew in the face of facts, made his children hope whatwas utterly out of the question, in effect, told 53
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
lies. He stamped his foot on the stone step. “ Damn you,” he said. But what had she said? Simply that it might be fine to-morrow. So it might. 
Not with the barometer falling and the winddue west. 
To pursue truth with such astonishing lack of consideration for other people’s feelings, to rend the thin veils of civilisation so wantonly, so brutally, was to her so horrible an outrage of human decency that, without replying, dazedand blinded, she bent her head as if to let the pelt of jagged hail, the drench of dirty water, bespatter her unrebuked. There was nothing to be said. 
He stood by her in silence. Very humbly, at length, he said that he would step over and ask the Coastguards if she liked. 
There was nobody whom she reverenced as she reverenced him. 
She was quite ready to take his word for it, she said. Only then they need not cut sandwiches—^that was all. They came to her, naturally, since she was a woman, all day long with this andthat; one wanting this, another that; the children were growing up; she often felt she was nothingbut a sponge sopped full of human emotions.Then he said. Damn you. He said. It must rain. 54
THE WINDOW 
He said. It won’t rain; and instantly a Heaven ofsecurity opened before her. There was nobodyshe reverenced more. She was not good enoughto tie his shoe strings, she felt. 
Already ashamed of that petulance, of that gesticulation of the hands when charging at the head of his troops, Mr. Ramsay rather sheepishly prodded his son’s bare legs once more, and then, as if he had her leave for it, with a movement
which oddly reminded his wife of the great sea lion at the Zoo tumbling backwards after swallow ing his fish and walloping off so that the water in the tank washes from side to side, he dived into the evening air which, already thinner, was taking the substance from leaves and hedges but, as if in return, restoring to roses and pinks a lustre whichthey had not had by day. 
“ Someone had blundered,” he said again, striding off, up and down the terrace. But how extraordinarily his note had changed It was like the cuckoo; “ in June he gets out of tune ”; as if he were trying over, tentatively seeking, some phrase for a new mood, and havingBut it sounded ridiculous—“ Someone had blun 
only this at hand, used it, cracked though it was. dered ”—said like that, almost as a question, without any conviction, melodiously. Mrs.Ramsay could not help smiling, and soon, sure 
SS
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
enough, walking up and down, he hummed it, dropped it, fell silent. 
He was safe, he was restored to his privacy. He stopped to light his pipe, looked once at his wife and son in the window, and as one raises one’s eyes from a page in an express train and sees a farm, a tree, a cluster of cottages as an illustration, a confirmation of something on the printed page to which one returns, fortified, and satisfied, so without his distinguishing either his son or his wife, the sight of them fortified him and satisfied him and consecrated his eflfort to arrive at a perfectly clear understanding of the problem which now engaged the energies of his splendid mind. 
It was a splendid mind. For if thought is like the keyboard of a piano, divided into so many notes, or like the alphabet is ranged in twenty-six letters all in order, then his splendid mind had no sort of difficulty in running over those letters one by one, firmly and accurately, until it had reached, say, the letter Q. He reached Q. Very few people in the whole of England ever reach Q. Here, stopping for one moment by the stone urn which held the geraniums,, he saw, but now far far away, like children pick ing up shells, divinely innocent and occu pied with little trifles at their feet and somehow entirely defenceless against a doom which he 56
THE WINDOW 
perceived, his wife and son, together, in thewindow. They needed his protection ; he gave it them. But after Q.? What comes next.? After Q
-xirefe are a number of letters the last of which is scarcely visible to mortal eyes, but glimmers red in the distance. Z is only reached once by one manin a generation. Still, if he could reach Rit would be something. Here at least was Q. Hedug his heels in at Q. Q he was sure of. Q
he could demonstrate. If Q then is Q—RHere he knocked his pipe out, with two or three resonant taps on the ram’s horn which made the handle of the urn, and proceeded. “ Then R . . .” He braced himself. He clenched himself. 
Qualities that would have saved a ship’s company exposed on a broiling sea with six 
biscuits and a flask of water—endurance andjustice, foresight, devotion, skill, came to his help. 
R is then—what is R.? A shutter, like the leathern eyelid of a lizard, flickered over the intensity of his gaze andobscured the letter R. In that flash of darkness heheard people saying—^he was a failure—that Rwas beyond him. He would never reach R. Onto R, once more. R 
Qualities that in a desolate expedition across the icy solitudes of the Polar region would have made him the leader, the guide, the counsellor, n
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
whose temper, neither sanguine nor despondent, surveys with equanimity what is to be and faces it, came to his help again. R 
The lizard’s eye flickered once more. The veins on his forehead bulged. The geranium in the urn became startlingly visible and, displayed among its leaves, he could see, without wishing it, that old, that obvious distinction between the two classes of men; on the one hand the steady goers of superhuman strength who, plodding and persevering, repeat the whole alphabet in order, twenty-six letters in all, from start to finish; on the other the gifted, the inspired who, miracu- ; lously, lump all the letters together in one flash the way of genius. He had not genius ; he laid no claim to that: but he had, or might have had, the,| 
power to repeat every letter of the alphabet from A to Z accurately in order. Meanwhile, he stuck at Q. On, then, on to R, 
Feelings that would not have disgraced a leader who, now that the snow has begun to fall and the mountain-top is covered in mist, knowsthat he must lay himself down and die before^ morning comes, stole upon him, paling thel coloiu: of his eyes, giving him, even in the twO' minutes of his turn on the terrace, the bleached look of withered old age. Yet he would not die- lying down ; he would find some crag of rock, and^ 58
THE WINDOW 
there, his eyes fixed on the storm, trying to theend to pierce the darkness, he would die stand ing. He would never reach R. 
He stood stock still, by the urn, with thegeranium flowing over it. How many men in a thousand million, he asked himself, reach Zafter all.? Surely the leader of a forlorn hope mayask himself that, and answer, without treachery to the expedition behind him, “ One perhaps ”. One in a generation. Is he to be blamed then if he is not that one.? provided he has toiled honestly, given to the best of his power, till he has nomore left to give.? And his fame lasts how long.? It is permissible even for a dying hero to thinkbefore he dies how men will speak of him here after. His fame lasts perhaps two thousandyears. And what are two thousand years.? (askedMr. Ramsay ironically, staring at the hedge). What, indeed, if you look from a mountain-topdown the long wastes of the ages.? The verystone one kicks with one’s boot will outlast Shakespeare. His own little light would shine,' not very brightly, for a year or two, and wouldthen be merged in some bigger light, and that in a bigger still. (He looked into the darkness, into the intricacy of the twigs.) Who then could blame the leader of that forlorn party which aft^r all has climbed high enough to see the waste of
59
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
the years and the perishing of stars, if before death stiffens his limbs beyond the power of movement he does a little consciously raise his 
numbed fingers to his brow, and square his shoulders, so that when the search party comes they will find him dead at his post, the fine figure of a soldier? Mr. Ramsay squared his shoulders and stood very upright by the urn. 
Who shall blame him, if, so standing for a moment, he dwells upon fame, upon search parties, upon cairns raised by grateful followers over his bones? Finally, who shall blame the leader of the doomed expedition, if, having adventured to the uttermost, and used his strength wholly to the last ounce and fallen asleep not much caring if he wakes or not, he now perceives by some pricking in his toes that he lives, and does not on the whole object to live, but requires sympathy, and whisky, and someone to tell the story of his suffering to at once? Who shall blame him? Who will not secretly rejoice when the hero puts his armour off, and halts by the window and gazes at his wife and son, who very distant at first, gradually come closer and closer, till lips and book and head are clearly before him, though still lovely and unfamiliar from the intensity of his isolation and the waste of ages and the perishing of the stars, and finally 6o
THE WINDOW 
putting his pipe in his pocket and bending his magnificent head before her—who will blamehim if he does homage to the beauty of the world?
7 
But his son hated him. He hated him for coming up to them, for stopping and lookingdown on them; he hated him for interrupting them; he hated him for the exaltation and sub limity of his gestures; for the magnificence ofhis head; for his exactingness and egotism (for there he stood, commanding them to attend to him); but most of all he hated the twang andtwitter of his father’s emotion which, vibrating round them, disturbed the perfect simplicity andgood sense of his relations with his mother. Bylooking fixedly at the page, he hoped to makehim move on; by pointing his finger at a word,he hoped to recall his mother’s attention, which,he knew angrily, wavered instantly his father stopped. But no. Nothing would make Mr.Ramsay move on. There he stood, demandingsympathy. 
Mrs. Ramsay, who had been sitting loosely, folding her son in her arm, braced herself, and, half turning, seemed to raise herself with an effort, and at once to pour erect into the air a rain of6i
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
energy, a column of spray, looking at the same time animated and alive as if all her energies were being fused into force, burning and illuminating (quietly though she sat, taking up her stocking 
again), and into this delicious fecundity, this fountain and spray of life, the fatal sterility of the male plunged itself, like a beak of brass, barren and bare. He wanted sympathy. He was a failure, he said. Mrs. Ramsay flashed her needles. Mr. Ramsay repeated, never taking his 
eyes from her face, that he was a failure. She blew the words back at him. “ Charles Tansley . . . ” she said. But he must have more than that. It was- sympathy he wanted, to be assured of his genius, first of all, and then to be taken within the circle of life, warmed and soothed, to have' his senses restored to him, his barrenness made fertile, and all the rooms of the house made full 
of life—the drawing-room; behind the drawings room the kitchen; above the kitchen the bedrooms; and beyond them the nurseries; they must be furnished, they must be filled with life. 
Charles Tansley thought him the greatest metaphys&ian of the time, she said. But he must have \more than that. He must have sympathy. H.e must be assured that he too lived - 
in the heart of life; was needed; not here only, but all over the -^yorld. Flashinsr herTneedli 62
THE WINDOW 
confident, upright, she created drawing-room andkitchen, set them all aglow; bade him take his ease there, go in and out, enjoy himself. Shelaughed, she knitted. Standing between her knees, very stiff, James felt all her strength flaring upto be drunk and quenched by the beak of brass, the arid scimitar of the male, which smote merci lessly, again and again, demanding sympathy. 
He was a failure, he repeated. Well, lookthen, feel then. Flashing her needles, glancinground about her, out of the window, into the room,at James himself, she assured him, beyond ashadow of a doubt, by her laugh, her poise, hercompetence (as a nurse carrying a light across a dark room assures a fractious child), that it wasreal ; the house was full ; the garden blowing. If heput implicit faith in her, nothing should hurt him;however deep he buried himself or climbed high, not for a second should he find himself withouther. So boasting of her capacity to surroundand protect, there was scarcely a shell of herself left for her to know herself by; all was so lavished and spent; and James, as he stood stiff betweenher knees, felt her rise in a rosy-flowered fruit tree laid with leaves and dancing boughs into which the beak of brass, the arid scimitar of his father, the egotistical man, plunged and smote, demanding sympathy. 
63
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
Filled with her words, like a child who drops off satisfied, he said, at last, looking at her with humble gratitude, restored, renewed, that he would take a turn; he would watch the children playing cricket. He went. 
Immediately, Mrs. Ramsay seemed to fold herself together, one petal closed in another, and the whole fabric fell in exhaustion upon itself, so that she had only strength enough to move her finger, in exquisite abandonment to exhaustion, across the page of Grimm’s fairy story, while there throbbed through her, like the pulse in a spring which has expanded to its full width and nowgently ceases to beat, the rapture of successful creation. 
Every throb of this pulse seemed, as he walked' away, to enclose her and her husband, and to give to each that solace which two different notes, one high, one low, struck together, seem to give each other as they combine. Yet, as the resonance died, and she turned to the Fairy Tale again, Mrs. Ramsay felt not only exhausted in body (after wards, not at the time, she always felt this) but also there tinged her physical fatigue some faintly disagreeable sensation with another origin. Not that, as she read aloud the story of the Fisherman’s Wife, she knew precisely what it came from; nor did she let herself put into words her dissafis- 64
THE WINDOW 
faction when she realised, at the turn of the pagewhen she stopped and heard dully, ominously, a wave fall, how it came from this : she did not like, even for a second, to feel finer than her husbandand further, could not bear not being entirely sure, when she spoke to him, of the truth of whatshe said. Universities and people wanting him,lectures and books and their being of the highestimportance—all that she did not doubt for a moment; but it was their relation, and his comingto her like that, openly, so that anyone could see, that discomposed her; for then people said hedepended on her, when they must know that ofthe two he was infinitely the more important, andwhat she gave the world, in comparison with whathe gave, negligible. But then again, it was the 
other thing too—not being able to tell him the truth, being afraid, for instance, about the green house roof and the expense it would be, fifty pounds perhaps, to mend it; and then about his books, to be afraid that he might guess, what shea little suspected, that his last book was not quite his best book (she gathered that from WilliamBankes); and then to hide small daily things, andthe children seeing it, and the burden it laid on
them—^all this diminished the entire joy, the purejoy, of the two notes sounding together, and let the sound die on her ear now with a dismal flatness. E 65
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
A shadow was on the page; she looked up. It was Augustus Carmichael shuffling past, pre cisely now, at the very moment when it was painful to be reminded of the inadequacy of humanrelationships, that the most perfect was flawed, and could not bear the examination which, loving her husband, with her instinct for truth, she turned upon it; when it was painful to feel herself convicted of unworthiness, and impeded in her proper function by these lies, these exaggerations, —^it was at this moment when she was fretted thus ignobly in the wake of her exaltation, that Mr. Carmichael shuffled past, in his yellow slippers, and some demon in her made it necessary 
for her to call out, as he passed, 
“ Going indoors, Mr. Carmichael.? ” 
8 
He said nothing. He took opium. Thechildren said he had stained his beard yellow with it. Perhaps. What was obvious to her was that the. poor man was unhappy, came to them every ye^ as an escape; and yet every year, she felt the sarnie thing; he did not trust her. She said, “ I am\going to the town. Shall I get you stamps, papef^ tobacco.? ” and she felt him wince. He did no)^. trust her. It was his wife’s 66
THE WINDOW 
doing. She remembered that iniquity of his wife’s towards him, which had made her turn to steel and adamant there, in the horrid little roomin St. John’s Wood, when with her own eyes shehad seen that odious woman turn him out of the house. He was unkempt; he dropped things onhis coat; he had the tiresomeness of an old manwith nothing in the world to do; and she turnedhim out of the room. She said, in her odious way,“ Now, Mrs. Ramsay and I want to have a little talk together,” and Mrs. Ramsay could see, as if before her eyes, the innumerable miseries of his life. Had he money enough to buy tobacco.? Did he have to ask her for it.? half a crown.? eighteenpence.? Oh, she could not bear to think of the little indignities she made him suffer. Andalways now (why, she could not guess, except that it came probably from that woman somehow) heshrank from her. He never told her anything. But what more could she have done.? There wasa sunny room given up to him. The children were good to him. Never did she show a sign ofnot wanting him. She went out of her way indeedto be friendly. Do you want stamps, do you wanttobacco.? Here’s a book you might like and so 
on. And after all—after all (here insensibly she drew herself together, physically, the sense of her own beauty becoming, as it did so seldom, present 67
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
to her)—^after all, she had not generally any difficulty in making people like her; for instance, George Manning; Mr. Wallace; famous as they were, they would come to her of an evening, quietly, and talk alone over her fire. She bore about with her, she could not help knowing it, the torch of her beauty; she carried it erect into any room that she entered; and after all, veil it as 
she might, and shrink from the monotony of bearing that it imposed on her, her beauty was apparent. She had been admired. She had been loved. She had entered rooms where mourners sat. Tears had flown in her presence. Men, and 
women too, letting go the multiplicity of things, had allowed themselves with her the relief of simplicity. It injured her that he should shrink. It hurt her. And yet not cleanly, not rightly. 
That was what she minded, coming as it did on top of her discontent with her husband ; the sense she had now when Mr. Carmichael shuffled 
past, just nodding to her question, with a book beneath his arm, in his yellow slippers, that she was suspected; and that all this desire of hers to give, to help, was vanity. For her own self- satisfaction was it that she wished so instinctively to help, to give, that people might say of her, “ O Mrs. Ramsay! dear Mrs. Ramsay . . . Mrs. Ramsay, of course! ” and need her and send for 68
THE WINDOW 
her and admire her? Was it not secretly this that she wanted, and therefore when Mr. Carmichaelshrank away from her, as he did at this moment,making off to some corner where he did acrostics endlessly, she did not feel merely snubbed backin her instinct, but made aware of the pettiness of some part of her, and of human relations, howflawed they are, how despicable, how self-seeking, at their best. Shabby and worn out, and not pre sumably (her cheeks were hollow, her hair waswhite) any longer a sight that filled the eyes withjoy, she had better devote her mind to the story of the Fisherman and his Wife and so pacify that bundle of sensitiveness (none of her children wasas sensitive as he was) her son James. 
“ The man’s heart grew heavy,” she readaloud, “ and he would not go. He said to himself, ‘ It is not right,’ and yet he went. Andwhen he came to the sea the water was quite purple and dark blue, and grey and thick, and nolonger so green and yellow, but it was still quiet. And he stood there and said ” 
Mrs. Ramsay could have wished that herhusband had not chosen that moment to stop. Why had he not gone as he said to watch the children playing cricket? But he did not speak;he looked; he nodded; he approved; he went on. He slipped seeing before him that hedge which
69
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
had over and over again rounded some pause, signified some conclusion, seeing his wife and child, seeing again the urns with the trailing red geraniums which had so often decorated processes of thought, and bore, written up among their 
leaves, as if they were scraps of paper on which one scribbles notes in the rush of reading—^he slipped, seeing all this, . smoothly into specula tion suggested by an article in The Times about the number of Americans who visit Shakespeare’s house every year. If Shakespeare had never existed, he asked, would the world have differed much from what it is to-day? Does the progress of civilisation depend upon great men? Is the lot of the average human being better now than in the time of the Pharaohs? Is the lot of the average human being, however, he asked himself, the criterion by which we judge the measure of 
civilisation? Possibly not. Possibly the greatest good requires the existence of a slave class. Theliftman in the Tube is an eternal necessity. The thought was distasteful to him. He tossed his head. To avoid it, he would find some wayof snubbing the predominance of the arts. Hewould argue that the world exists for the average human being; that the arts are merely a decora tion imposed on the top of human life ; they donot express it. Nor is Shakespeare necessary to it. 70
THE WINDOW 
Not knowing precisely why it was that he wantedto disparage Shakespeare and come to the rescueof the man who stands eternally in the door of thelift, he picked a leaf sharply from the hedge. Allthis would have to be dished up for the young menat Cardiff next month, he thought; here, on his terrace, he was merely foraging and picnicking (hethrew away the leaf that he had picked so peevishly) like a man who reaches from his horse to pick abunch of roses, or stuffs his pockets with nuts as he ambles at his ease through the lanes and fields of a country known to him from boyhood. It wasall familiar; this turning, that stile, that cut across the fields. Hours he would spend thus, with his pipe, of an evening, thinking up and down and in and out of the old familiar lanes and commons,which were all stuck about with the history of that campaign there, the life of this statesman here, with poems and with anecdotes, with figures too, this thinker, that soldier; all very brisk and clear; but at length the lane, the field, the common, the fruitful nut-tree and the flowering hedge led himon to that further turn of the road where he dis mounted always, tied his horse to a tree, andproceeded on foot alone. He reached the edgeof the lawn and looked out on the bay beneath. 
It was his fate, his peculiarity, whether hewished it or not, to come out thus on a spit of land 71
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
which the sea is slowly eating away, and there to stand, like a desolate sea-bird, alone. It was his power, his gift, suddenly to shed all superfluities, to shrink and diminish so that he looked barer and felt sparer, even physically, yet lost none of 
his intensity of mind, and so to stand on his little ledge facing the dark of human ignorance, how we know nothing and the sea eats away the ground 
we stand on—^that was his fate, his gift. But having thrown away, when he dismounted, all gestures and fripperies, all trophies of nuts and roses, and shrunk so that not only fame but even his own name was forgotten by him, he kept even in that desolation a vigilance which spared no phantom and luxuriated in no vision, and it was in this guise that he inspired in William Bankes 
(intermittently) and in Charles Tansley (obsequi ously) and in his wife now, when she looked up and saw him standing at the edge of the lawn, profound reverence, and pity, and gratitude too, as a stake driven into the bed of a channel upon which the gulls perch and the waves beat inspires in merry boat-loads a feeling of gratitude for the duty it has taken upon itself of marking the channel out there in the floods alone. 
But the father of eight children has no choice. . . Muttering half aloud, so he broke off, turned, sighed, raised his eyes, sought the 72
THE WINDOW 
figure of his wife reading stories to the little boy; filled his pipe. He turned from the sight ofhuman ignorance and human fate and the sea eating the ground we stand on, which, had hebeen able to contemplate it fixedly might haveled to something; and found consolation in trifles so slight compared with the august themejust now before him that he was disposed to slur that comfort over, to deprecate it, as if to becaught happy in a world of misery was for anhonest man the most despicable of crimes. It was true; he was for the most part happy; he hadhis wife; he had his children; he had promisedin six weeks’ time to talk “ some nonsense ” to the young men of Cardiff about Locke, Hume,Berkeley, and the causes of the French Revolu tion. But this and his pleasure in it, in the phrases he made, in the ardour of youth, in his 
wife’s beauty, in the tributes that reached himfrom Swansea, Cardiff, Exeter, Southampton, 
Kidderminster, Oxford, Cambridge—^all had to be deprecated and concealed under the phrase “ talking nonsense,” because, in effect, he hadnot done the thing he might have done. It was a disguise; it was the refuge of a man afraid to own his own feelings, who could not say. 
This is what I like—this is what I am ; and rather pitiable and distasteful to William Bankes and 
73
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
Lily Briscoe, who wondered why such conceal ments should be necessary; why he needed always praise; why so brave a man in thought should be so timid in life; how strangely he was venerable and laughable at one and the same time. 
Teaching and preaching is beyond humanpower, Lily suspected. (She was putting awayher things). If you are exalted you must somehowcome a cropper. Mrs. Ramsay gave him whathe asked too easily. Then the change must be so upsetting, Lily said. He comes in from his books and finds us all playing games and talking nonsense. Imagine what a change from the things 
he thinks about, she said. 
He was bearing down upon them. Nowhe stopped dead and stood looking in silence at the sea. Now he had turned away again. 
9 
Yes, Mr. Bankes said, watching him go. It was a thousand pities. (Lily had said somethingabout his frightening her—^he changed from onemood to another so suddenly.) Yes, said Mr,Bankes, it was a thousand pities that Ramsaycould not behave a little more like other people. (For he liked Lily Briscoe; he could discuss Ramsay with her quite openly.) It was for that 74
THE WINDOW 
reason, he said, that the young don’t read Carlyle. A crusty old grumbler who lost his temper if theporridge was cold, why should he preach to us.'’ was what Mr. Bankes understood that youngpeople said nowadays. It was a thousand pities if you thought, as he did, that Carlyle was one ofthe great teachers of mankind. Lily was ashamedto say that she had not read Carlyle since she wasat school. But in her opinion one liked Mr.Ramsay all the better for thinking that if his little finger ached the whole world must come to an end. It was not that she minded. For whocould be deceived by him.'* He asked you quite openly to flatter him, to admire him, his little dodges deceived nobody. What she disliked washis narrowness, his blindness, she said, lookingafter him. 
“A bit of a hypocrite.’’ ” Mr. Bankes sug gested, looking, too, at Mr. Ramsay’s back, for washe not thinking of his friendship, and of Camrefusing to give him a flower, and of all those 
boys and girls, and his own house, full of comfort, but, since his wife’s death, quiet rather.? Ofcourse, he had his work. ... All the same, herather wished Lily to agree that Ramsay was, as he said, “ a bit of a hypocrite ”. 
Lily Briscoe went on putting away her brushes, looking up, looking down. Looking up, there 75
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
he was—Mr. Ramsay—advancing towards them, swinging, careless, oblivious, remote. A bit of 
a hypocrite? she repeated. Oh no—the most sincere of men, the truest (here he was), the best; but, looking down, she thought, he is absorbed in himself, he is tyrannical, he is unjust; and kept looking down, purposely, for only so could she keep steady, staying with the Ramsays. Directly one looked up and saw them, what she called “ being in love ” flooded them. They became part of that unreal but penetrating and exciting universe which is the world seen through the eyes of love. The sky stuck to them; the birds sang through them. And, what was even more exciting, she felt, too, as she saw Mr. Ramsay bearing down and retreating, and Mrs. Ramsay sitting with James in the window and the cloud moving and the tree bending, how life, from being made up of little separate incidents which one lived one by one, became curled and whole like a wave which bore one up with it and threw one down with it, there, with a dash on the beach. 
Mr. Bankes expected her to answer. Andshe was about to say something criticising Mrs. Ramsay, how she was alarming, too, in ' her way, high-handed, or words to that effect, when Mr. Bankes made it entirely unnecessary for her to speak by his rapture. For such it was 76
THE WINDOW 
considering his age, turned sixty, and his clean liness and his impersonality, and the white scien tific coat which seemed to clothe him. Forhim to gaze as Lily saw him gazing at Mrs.Ramsay was a rapture, equivalent, Lily felt, to the loves of dozens of young men (and perhapsMrs. Ramsay had never excited the loves ofdozens of young men). It was love, she thought, pretending to move her canvas, distilled andfiltered; love that never attempted to clutch its object; but, like the love which mathematiciansbear their symbols, or poets their phrases, wasmeant to be spread over the world and becomepart of the human gain. So it was indeed. Theworld by all means should have shared it, could Mr. Bankes have said why that woman pleased him so; why the sight of her reading a fairy tale to her boy had upon him precisely the same effect as the solution of a scientific problem, so that herested in contemplation of it, and felt, as he felt when he had proved something absolute aboutthe digestive system of plants, that barbarity wastamed, the reign of chaos subdued. 
Such a rapture—for by what other name could one call it.?—made Lily Briscoe forget entirely what she had been about to say. It was nothing of importance; something about Mrs. Ramsay.It paled beside this “ rapture ”, this silent stare, 
77
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
for which she felt intense gratitude; for nothing so solaced her, eased her of the perplexity of life, and miraculously raised its burdens, as this sub lime power, this heavenly gift, and one would no more disturb it, while it lasted, than break up the shaft of sunlight lying level across the floor. 
That people should love like this, that Mr. Bankes should feel this for Mrs. Ramsay (she glanced at him musing) was helpful, was exalting. She wiped one brush after another upon a piece of old rag, menially, on purpose. She took shelter from the reverence which covered all women; she felt herself praised. Let him gaze; she would steal a look at her picture. 
She could have wept. It was bad, it was bad, it was infinitely bad! She could have done it differently of course; the colour could have been thinned and faded; the shapes etherealised; that was how Paunceforte would have seen it. But then she did not see it like that. She saw the colour burning on a framework of steel; the light of a butterfly’s wing lying upon the arches of a cathedral. Of all that only a few random marks scrawled upon the canvas remained. And it would never be seen; never be hung even, and there was Mr. Tansley whispering in her ear, “ Women can’t paint, women can’t write . . .” 
She now remembered what she had been going 78
THE WINDOW 
to say about Mrs. Ramsay. She did not know howshe would have put it; but it would have beensomething critical. She had been annoyed theother night by some highhandedness. Lookingalong the level of Mr. Bankes’ glance at her, shethought that no woman could worship anotherwoman in the way he worshipped; they couldonly seek shelter under the shade which Mr.Bankes extended over them both. Looking alonghis beam she added to it her different rav, thinking that she was unquestionably the loveliest of people (bowed over her book); the best perhaps; but also, different too from the perfect shape which one saw there. But why different, and how different.? she asked herself, scraping her palette of all those mounds of blue and green which seemed to her like clods with no life in them now, yet she vowed, she would inspire them,force them to move, flow, do her bidding to- morrow. How did she differ.? What was the spirit in her, the essential thing, by which, hadyou found a glove in the corner of a sofa, you
would have known it, from its twisted finger, hers indisputably.? She was like a bird for speed, an arrow for directness. She was wilful; she wascommanding (of course, Lily reminded herself, I am thinking of her relations with women, and I am much younger, an insignificant person, living 
79
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
off the Brompton Road). She opened bedroomwindows. She shut doors. (So she tried to start the tune of Mrs. Ramsay in her head.) Arriving late at night, with a light tap on one’s bed room door, wrapped in an old fur coat (for the 
setting of her beauty was always that—hasty, but apt), she would enact again whatever it might be—Charles Tansley losing his umbrella; Mr. Carmichael snuffing and sniffing; Mr.Bankes saying, “ the vegetable salts are lost”. All this she would adroitly shape; even malici ously twist; and, moving over to the window,
in pretence that she must go,—it was dawn, she could see the sun rising,—half turn back, moreintimately, but still always laughing, insist that she must, Minta must, they all must marry, since in the whole world, whatever laurels mightbe tossed to her (but Mrs. Ramsay cared not a fig for her painting), or triumphs won by her (probably Mrs. Ramsay had had her share of those), and here she saddened, darkened, andcame back to her chair, there could be no dis- puting this: an unmarried woman (she lightly took her hand for a moment), an unmarriedwoman has missed the best of life. Thehouse seemed full of children sleeping and Mrs.Ramsay listening; of shaded lights and regular breathing. 
8o
THE WINDOW 
Oh but, Lily would say, there was her father; her home; even, had she dared to say it, herpainting. But all this seemed so little, so virginal, against the other. Yet, as the night wore on, and white lights parted the curtains, and evennow and then some bird chirped in the garden,gathering a desperate courage she would urgeher own exemption from the universal law ; pleadfor it; she liked to be alone; she liked to beherself; she was not made for that; and so haveto meet a serious stare from eyes of unparalleled depth, and confront Mrs. Ramsay’s simplecertainty (and she was childlike now) that her dearLily, her little Brisk, was a fool. Then, she re- membered, she had laid her head on Mrs. Ramsay’slap and laughed and laughed and laughed, laughedalmost hysterically at the thought of Mrs. Ramsaypresiding with immutable calm over destinies which she completely failed to understand. Thereshe sat, simple, serious. She had recovered her
sense of her now—this was the glove’s twisted finger. But into what sanctuary had one pene trated.? Lily Briscoe had looked up at last, and there was Mrs. Ramsay, unwitting entirely what had caused her laughter, still presiding, but now with every trace of wilfulness abol ished, and in its stead, something clear as the space which the clouds at last uncover—the F 8i
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
little space of sky which sleeps beside the 
moon.
Was it wisdom? Was it knowledge? Was it, once more, the deceptiveness of beauty, so that all one’s perceptions, half-way to truth, were tangled in a golden mesh? or did she lock up within her some secret which certainly Lily Briscoe believed people must have for the world to go on at all? Every one could not be as helter skelter, hand to mouth as she was. But if they knew, could they tell one what they knew? Sitting on the floor with her arms round Mrs. Ramsay’s knees, close as she could get, smiling to think that Mrs. Ramsay would never know the reason of that pressure, she imagined how in the 
chambers of the mind and heart of the woman who was, physically, touching her, were stood, like the treasures in the tombs of kings, tablets bearing sacred inscriptions, which ifone could spell them out would teach one everything, but they would never be offered openly, never made public. What art was there, known to love or cunning, by which one pressed through into those secret chambers? What device for becoming, like waters poured into one jar, inextricably the same, one 
with the object one adored? Could the body achieve it, or the mind, subtly mingling in the intricate passages of the brain? or the heart? 82
THE WINDOW 
Could loving, as people called it, make her andMrs. Ramsay one.^ for it was not knowledge butunity that she desired, not inscriptions on tablets, nothing that could be written in any languageknown to men, but intimacy itself, which is knowledge, she had thought, leaning her head onMrs. Ramsay’s knee. 
Nothing happened. Nothing! Nothing! as she leant her head against Mrs. Ramsay’s knee.And yet, she knew knowledge and wisdom werestored in Mrs. Ramsay’s heart. How then, shehad asked herself, did one know one thing or another thing about people, sealed as they were.? Only like a bee, drawn by some sweetness or sharpness in the air intangible to touch or taste, one haunted the dome-shaped hive, ranged the wastes of the air over the countries of the worldalone, and then haunted the hives with their murmurs and their stirrings; the hives whichwere people. Mrs. Ramsay rose. Lily rose. Mrs. Ramsay went. For days there hung about her, as after a dream some subtle change is felt in the person one has dreamt of, more vividly than anything she said, the sound of murmuringand, as she sat in the wicker arm-chair in the drawing-room window she wore, to Lily’s eyes, an august shape; the shape of a dome. 
This ray passed level with Mr. Bankes’s ray 83
TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 
Straight to Mrs. Ramsay sitting reading there with James at her knee. But now while she still looked, Mr. Bankes had done. He had put on his spectacles. He had stepped back. He had raised his hand. He had slightly narrowed his clear blue eyes, when Lily, rousing herself, saw what he was at, and winced like a dog who sees a hand raised to strike it. She would have snatched her picture off the easel, but she said to herself, One must. She braced herself to stand the awful trial of someone looking at her picture. One must, she said, one must. And if it must be seen, Mr. Bankes was less alarming than another. But that any other eyes should see the residue of her thirty-three years, the deposit of each day’s living, mixed with something more secret than she had ever spoken or shown in the course of all those days was an agony. At the same time it was immensely exciting. 
Nothing could be cooler and quieter. Taking out a penknife, Mr. Bankes tapped the canvas with the bone handle. What did she wish to indicate by the triangular purple shape, “just there.? ” he asked.' It was Mrs. Ramsay reading to James, she 
said. She knew his objection—^that no one could tell it for a human shape. But she had made no attempt at likeness, she said. For what reason 84
THE WINDOW 
had she introduced them then? he asked. Whyindeed?—except that if there, in that corner, it was bright, here, in this, she felt the need ofdarkness. Simple, obvious, commonplace, as it was, Mr. Bankes was interested. Mother andchild then—objects of universal veneration, andin this case the mother was famous for her beauty—^might be reduced, he pondered, to a purpleshadow without irreverence. 
But the picture was not of them, she said. Or, not in his sense. There were other senses, too, in which one might reverence them. Bya shadow here and a light there, for instance. Her tribute took that form, if, as she vaguelysupposed, a picture must be a tribute. Amother and child might be reduced to a shadowwithout irreverence. A light here required a shadow there. He considered. He was interested. He took it scientifically in complete good faith. The truth was that all his prejudices were onthe other side, he explained. The largest picture in his drawing-room, which painters had praised, and valued at a higher price than he had given for it, was of the cherry trees in blossom on the banksof the Kennet. He had spent his honeymoonon the banks of the Kennet, he said, Lily mustcome and see that picture, he said. But now he turned, with his glasses raised to the scientific 85
